access to the internet is considered a
basic human right it keeps us informed
entertained allows us to connect with
each other and the world and that
connection is especially important
during times of War I'm Analise boures
and this is the
[Music]
stream we don't have Internet people
can't call the ambulance and the
bombings all around us
Israel's war on Gaza has taken on a
multitude of shapes the bombing and the
raids are only part of the story another
less talked about weapon is connectivity
or lack thereof Israel controls most of
the electricity as well as of
telecommunications and internet access
in Gaza first it turned off power lines
which made hospitals and even sewage
plants stop working later internet
blackouts were registered across the
strip which made a dire situation even
worse we managed to connect with one
resident afaf alar who is in the south
of Gaza Strip AA thank you so much for
joining us here on the stream today
can I start by asking you after over a
month of chaos and destruction all
around you just how are you
doing I have just been texting uh some
of my friends on Instagram and WhatsApp
my friends who are not in the Gaza Strip
at the moment uh telling them that I
almost forgot who I am and I almost
forgot how my life used to be before uh
the aggression on the Gaza Strip started
I was just telling them that I don't
want to reach to the point where I'm
used to what's happening where where I
wake up every day with with the the
thought that oh this is never going to
end um I think that I've been trying my
best to stay well put together and and
um you know keep my strength and my
energy and everything but today
especially today after everything that
has been happening for for about a month
now more than a month now and after
seeing multiple members of my family
getting killed in in the air strikes and
after losing so many
friends um I can really say that I'm I'm
about to lose it
honestly you said you you've been
messaging friends outside of Gaza how
important is it to keep that connection
alive right now staying connected is is
crucial it's very important when when
when the connection was cut off uh from
the Gaza STP was cut off twice uh
completely Al let alone the fact that
it's it's very weak right now but when
it was cut off
completely I remember uh that I felt
like I was in an open air grave I swear
to God it almost fell felt like someone
has dug up a grave for me and told me to
just stay there you know I felt like my
hand were tied my mouth was shut and
that there's nothing I can do
anymore uh and I remember that after the
internet came
back that I read news that ambulances
and firefighters were fighting people
limbs on the streets that they couldn't
get to because no one no one was able to
call them to begin with no one was able
to call the ambulances the hospitals
tell them there is an attack in this
specific area please come and pick up
the people who died and pick up the
injuries no one was able to do that AFA
would you say this is perhaps another
tool of
War definitely they are trying to break
the spirits of the Palestinians up more
they saw that all of the bombing and all
of the killing and all of the
destruction still keep the Palestinian
people's
Faith even after all of that they are
looking now for their ways first of
which was cutting off uh the connection
completely of the Palestinians in Gaza
then they went on to bombing the solar
panels that are on top of hospitals
bakeries houses and and so much more so
that people don't even have any
electricity anymore whatsoever and then
they started targeting water wheels they
started targeting bakeries they started
targeting shops they are they are trying
to do anything they possibly can
not only to cause as much destruction as
possible and as much massacres as
possible but to also break up the
spirits of the Palestinians who are
still in their homes resisting the
ethnic cleansing and resisting the
displacement of Palestinians of of the
ga strip AA alar thank you so so much
for taking the time to speak to us here
on the stream let's now bring two more
voices to very important voices into
this conversation Alp toker is the
executive director of net block a cyber
security monitoring group he's joining
us today from Istanbul and Mina El haabi
he's a she's a journalist and author who
initiated connecting Gaza to collect and
send eims to people there she's joining
us from Cairo thank you both so much for
being here Mira we will talk about the
incredible movement you started in in in
just a moment but Al if I can start with
you your organization has been
monitoring these blackouts in Gaza and
on October 27th you said that you
observed a large single the largest
single internet disruption in Gaza since
the war started uh and we have a tweet
that you put out uh a total or near
blackout of the internet service um can
you help us understand the graphic that
you guys tweeted that day what exactly
uh are we seeing over
here yeah that's right on the 27th uh we
tracked a very significant a major
disruption to connectivity across the
Gaza Strip uh now this was unprecedented
in terms of what we've monitored uh both
during this conflict and before if you
take a look at the chart you can see uh
the observable connectivity levels so
what these represent are really uh an
outside analysis in real time of
connectivity in each of those regions
and you can see that you know uh
connectivity there at the beginning
prior to the seventh is fairly stable
and then you see over time at the very
start of this conflict you see a decline
in connectivity now we know that that
decline is attributed to a couple of
reasons one of them being uh the missile
strikes from Israel and the other being
uh the population flight as people leave
the territory so you have those two
factors but then on the 27th you can see
a very significant a major disruption as
connectivity just blacks out and this is
linked with with um a major U military
operation by Israel that coincides with
that time so we know that these
disruptions have been implemented during
those times for a duration of some 36
hours between the 27th and the 29th of
October this has had a very Major Impact
on people's ability to communicate and
it's really limited the world's ability
to understand also what's going on
within the territory so obviously a huge
impact and I I know you guys have also
observed other blackouts since
then yeah that's right so this uh wasn't
an isolated incident as we continue to
monitor we tracked a further one of
these interruptions on one November on
the 1 November uh just a few days later
uh which lasted some 9 and a half hours
or so and in terms of the mechanism that
was deployed there was very similar was
identical to what happened on the 27th
so we now know by the 1st of November
that the same thing is happening exact
same thing is happening again a second
time and we can tell from the
fingerprint of this Telemetry that it's
impacted the exact same exchanges the
same network and is having the same
effect in terms of a total or near
tootal blackout for the residents of the
Gaza Strip and then again on the 5th of
November we see that the same same thing
happens for a third time uh this time
for 15 hours so you know that we have
these three major blackouts in effect
and Al I mean the the fact that we see
the these lines kind of coming back up
again um it means that obviously some
sort of connectivity was restored after
these blackouts um in my understanding
this correctly because if this was
damaged to the infrastructure then
that's it the internet is gone and it's
gone forever but the fact that it comes
back does it suggest that this is some
kind of um I don't know uh a technical
trigger uh is is Behind These blackouts
right so we need to take a look at the
main mechanisms of disruptions to
understand what's going on here I mean
there's really three main causes of
what's uh the disruptions and we have
the power outages we have the kinetic
impact of the war of the fighting then
we also have Israel's ability to uh
connect or disconnect uh Gaza Strip at
will this is because uh Gaza relies on
Israeli connectivity as an upstream much
as relies on Israeli power and on
Israeli resources um due to the
geography of the situation so there are
many Hallmarks many indicators here that
these have been technical mechanisms
used to disrupt connectivity and what we
know for certain is that the same thing
has happened in each of these three
incidents so in terms of a reason for
this you know if it had been damaged to
infrastructure it simply wouldn't have
been possible to get repaired and
statements from the providers also say
that they don't know they didn't
actually apply fixes that back the
connectivity so there are very strong
indicators that this connectivity has
been disrupted from the outside with
intent I mean you mentioned impact and
if I can get Mina on this uh we talked
about obviously the emotional toll of
just feeling completely cut off from the
world um but that has also very
practical implications and I I imagine
you have been hearing about these
implications in your work as well
Mira
uh of course being isolated and being uh
droning in uncertainty of not being able
to communicate with the outside world or
with your uh family members or your
loved ones or even the hospitals and the
ambulances is for me it's outrageous and
definitely one of the war crimes
committed in uh Gaza um I've been uh
connecting people since October 20 or
29th um we've been we've been connected
we have connected more than
20,000 uh asms um they are now activated
in Gaza and we are fighting time to
connect more people uh since uh
yesterday and because there there is a
possibility a huge possibility for the
communication and the internet to go for
a Total
Blackout um due to lack of fuel in uh in
Gaza uh many uh many um many Network
providers like Ido and Joel the
Palestinians um Network providers have
published yesterday um official
statements on their social media stating
that they are going to be uh totally cut
off from providing communication and
internet access due to the lack of fuel
so
you you started this alone but you you
now have a team I believe you have
several people with you so you can keep
this this service operating 24 hours a
day yes we're a team of 11 people so far
uh because it's hard to um to grow your
team when when it comes to protection of
privacy of the Don donor details and
also uh being in direct contact with
people in Gaza uh to protect their
safety so so I have to be sure um 200%
of each and every member in my team sure
and and how how did this idea the idea
of connecting Gaza this movement you
started how did it come
about um actually I was in um in in in
Trials uh to connect the Palestinian red
crescent in coordination with the
Egyptian red crescent with starlinks um
the the link the company of elen musk
because he tweeted that he can provide
internet access through his company to
the official um Aid organization in Gaza
but we failed to fill the request and
later on El MK tweeted to one of the
leaders in the occupation Army uh that
he will not pro he will not provide
internet access uh without the
permission of USA and Israel which made
me so angry and I was updating my my
followers step by step through the um
the requests of store link and one of my
followers she's Egyptian Lebanese she
suggested do what do you think of isims
could it work and I was like whoa maybe
we can so I told her to send me two
isims as trials and I kept scrolling X
to find any uh people from Gaza uh who
are connected even with like we
connections so we can try on the first
two isms uh these two people are
journalists Ahmed fromaz and hind Ki and
I've have sent them the itms and it
worked successfully and we've provided
them with more asms to provide to their
teams and people around them and then I
um I posted like a spontaneous um call
for donation e donations on my uh
personal account uh and thousands of
people uh around around the world kept
sending me uh donations of uh QR codes
and esm donations uh so I had to um to
create an email an email address
especially for uh receiving the uh
donated
asms and then and then the community
just just grew and grew can can I ask
you very briefly what what I mean e are
are relatively uh new technology can you
explain in just a few words how do they
work uh so an an Asim is like an
nonphysical SIM card that has an
extension extension of your internet
package and calls package uh through
your um number so when uh when a person
in Europe or USA or across the world buy
an Asim so he buys like an extenstion to
his internet package that can be used um
for
roaming interesting fascinating I
imagine that you are going through quite
a lot as you said uh you you you barely
have time to sleep you have to bring
other people in I would like to uh thank
both of you very much for joining us
today Alp and Mira for your time uh Mina
because you are so busy we're going to
let you go and we wish you best of luck
ala you too of course and I would like
to uh now turn to uh another guest a
very uh important guest today as well to
help us uh put this puzzle together uh
dorham Abu Salim you joining us from DC
you he's a writer and a communication
specialist um and you have family inside
Gaza right now um can you tell us about
how you're getting by and and how are
you managing to connect with your father
and your mother in
Gaza it's been very very difficult
unfortunately you know uh since this uh
the Israel gression has started against
the Gaza Strip I've only managed to hear
the voice of my parents and for them to
hear my voice maybe three to four times
uh which to me is unbearable I am
someone who's always been in touch with
his family calling my mother and my
father almost in a daily basis uh so the
situation has been very very difficult
precisely because of the things that you
know uh both speakers earlier have
mentioned not only is it just a question
of the internet connection ity and our
inability to reach our families for
those of us who are abroad via you know
apps like WhatsApp Messenger or even
text messaging over data plans but also
landlines and mobile lines have been
severely impacted by this to the point
where it's very very difficult to make
these kind of calls can you tell us a
little bit about about your your mom and
your dad we're seeing them uh in some
photos right
now right uh you know I'm my mother and
father are both in the Gaza Strip with
two of my siblings my mom is in her late
60s and she's a blind woman my father is
in his 80 years old and he is paralyzed
and along with them are two of my
siblings a younger sister and an older
brother in the Gaza Strip and currently
in our household we are Sheltering three
more families uh that have you know been
forcibly displaced from Gaza City
towards Southern cities and we are based
in D which is right in the middle of the
Gaza scrip uh the situation for the
family last heard is incredibly
unbearable inhumane and undignified you
know the lack of water the lack of
electricity the lack of food and with my
parents specifically you know as elderly
people who live with disabilities and
chronic conditions unfortunately also
the lack of medication is is quite
threatening to their livelihood and
their wellbe uh so needless to say I
mean as it goes for everyone in the Gaza
script uh it I mean the situation could
be more so compounded for those living
with disabilities but it really is just
quite horrific and for someone like me
at a distance but who has also endured
and was there during for example the
2014 aggression of the Israeli
occupation against the Gaza Strip I am
just in in in horror and in absolute
pain day in and day out thinking what
they are enduring uh even at a distance
and you know for for me the question of
connectivity remains very very critical
uh I've heard Mira talk about eims which
I think have been very very useful I
have you know managed to get eims to my
sister in in the Gaza Strip although I
must say I mean even installing those is
quite an uous exercise it's quite
difficult without a connection to begin
with installing them can be difficult
and even though it worked for some time
it didn't work necessarily all the time
uh so it really is just a bit of a hit
and miss so far and it's all a byproduct
I I I believe you know of how the
Israeli control of the Gaza Strip uh is
you know manifesting itself it's not
just a question of the occupation and
the blockade and and and all of the
policies that we see in place but also
there is such a thing as a digital
occupation of all Palestinian
territories and these are Technologies
of occupation and enclosure because as
Al had mentioned earlier in the Gaza
Strip specifically there is no control
of the information and Communications
infrastructure whatsoever Israel
completely controls that at well uh even
its development even it's it's uh it's
its management and all these things so
it really is up to these radi occupation
authorities how the connectivity is is
available or not available in in the
Gaza St and what we've seen with this
particular situation you know with all
of these blackouts that have happened uh
isn't something new uh these have been
tactics that have been used in Prior
offenses that were committed against the
Gaza Strip uh so it's it's quite uh you
know predictable in a sense but it also
confirms to us that these are practices
that are as a matter of intent and
policy and as we all know everything
goes on on the ground is governed by
international law and the laws of war
and regulations of War so whe there is
policy and intent you could establish
violations and crimes and and of course
according to the UN internet access is a
human right and when that was
interrupted in Gaza nobody was quite
sure was actually happening so this was
one of the uh only way residents got
information
a message that replaced the traditional
call to prayer take a
look dorham how powerful of a tool of
War would you say this is uh it's an
incredibly powerful tool for for for
these occupation authorities to to be uh
able to really uh manage the way people
are communicating or even control it all
together as you've seen you know people
on the ground have tried to find
Alternatives in powerful ways uh yet at
the end of the day that the fact that
the Israeli occupation authorities have
that power to begin with is is truly
telling in so far that you are truly
controlling whether people are going to
be saved from under the rubble for
example and I'll share with you a very
quick story I am here based in the
United States on a WhatsApp group with
some friends who are from the Gaz strip
who are based here in the United States
uh one of them their family's home a
relative of their family's home was
bomed during the Israeli assault so far
on the Gaza Strip and he was texting our
group of people here here in the US uh
because we are spread out from different
towns in the Gaza Strip originally
asking us if we could spread the word
about what happened to his family's uh
relative home because they could not
there spread the word about finding
rescue missions to rescue people from
underneath the rubble so I mean this
this is supped to show the extent to
which Israel's ability to control the
way people communicate is actually very
very powerful and very very impactful in
a very negative way regarding people on
the G STP so you're not necessarily able
to communicate about developments you're
not necessarily able to communicate
about saving people people's lives
you're not necessarily able to
communicate about where it might be safe
or where it might not be safe for people
and all of these details so it really is
is is it's quite difficult to to
absolutely I'm so sorry to interrupt but
we we have a very limited amount of time
left less than a minute can I ask you if
you have a message I don't know to your
family to the International Community
you you can deliver that message through
us right
now you know I I think first and
foremost in everyone's mind mind it is
imperative on everyone to uh you know
ensure the safety and the livelihood and
the wellbeing of Palestinians everywhere
certainly in the Gaza Strip uh I know
that there is a global consensus around
a call for a ceasefire even though
certain governments have failed to
represent the calls of their own people
uh in that respect uh we you know I
remain hopeful and I pray for my family
that they remain safe uh along with
everyone else uh and where connectivity
is concerned as you've mentioned it is a
matter of Human Rights uh as has been
mentioned and and endorsed by the UN
Nations so when we look at this
particular situation so always remember
that any violation of it it could very
well be a tent amount to war crimes
committed by the Israel occupation dhan
thank you so so much for joining us
especially in this difficult time and
special thanks to Mirna Al and of course
AFA and thank you for watching don't
forget that if you have a about our show
you can talk to us on social media if
you have an idea or a topic that you'd
like to flag for us we welcome your
suggestions anytime you can use the
hashtag or the handle AJ stream and we
will look into it take care and I'll see
you
soon